Add a post about Dynamic partitioning in Modin (#5)
dchigarev/modin_perf_examples: docs/_posts/2024-06-27-dynamic-partitioning.md

---
layout: post
title: "Dynamic Partitioning in Modin"
categories: misc

> permalink: /gh_page_2.html

Reviewer: ```suggestion
permalink: /gh_page_3.html
```

> author: Kirill Suvorov

Reviewer: ```suggestion
author: Retribution98
```

Author: Why?

Author: Why?

Reviewer: I guess your GH nickname should be here.

Author: The blog-post page don't have any references or links to GH user, isn't it?

Reviewer: It seems so but I would prefer to follow our previous posts and put your GH nickname here.

Author: Ok, it is done

---

#### Annotation

> Modin improves work with partitions in the Map and TreeReduce operators in the 0.30.0 release for wide Dataframes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In 0.30.0 version Modin introduced dynamic partitioning for DataFrames
having excessive amount of partitions into the `Map` and `TreeReduce` operators.
This allows to boost performance for certain operations by combining some partitions
into virtual ones and utilizing CPU cores more efficiently.
```

> ## Dynamic Partitioning

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Dynamic Partitioning
```

Author: Done

> As you know, Modin splits a DataFrame into several partitions to parallelize execution. By default, Modin uses the CPU count for this purpose. When an operation is executed, the required partitions are sent to remote tasks and executed in parallel. To achieve optimal performance, it’s essential to fully utilize all available CPUs. Therefore, Modin splits the DataFrame into parts along both axes, resulting in an N × N partition grid (where N represents the CPU count).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As you know, Modin splits a DataFrame into partitions to distribute computation.
By default, Modin uses the number or CPUs available in the system for this purpose.
When an operation is executed, the required partitions are sent to remote tasks and processed in parallel.
To achieve optimal performance it's essential to fully utilize all available CPUs.
Therefore, Modin splits the DataFrame into partitions along both axes,
sometimes resulting in an `N × N` partition grid (where N represents the number of CPUs).
```

> This approach works well, especially for axis operations. In such cases, we concatenate some partitions into virtual partitions and distribute them to separate remote tasks. As a result, we achieve an optimal number of remote tasks equal to the CPU count. However, there are situations where this method is less effective. For straightforward operations like apply, using this partition splitting strategy can lead to performance issues due to an excessively large number of remote tasks.

Reviewer 2: Could you please give some context/reason why operations like apply would have a excessive number of remote tasks,.

Author: Ok, I added one more sentence about it.

Reviewer: No need for this kind of low level details.

> This approach works well, especially for axis operations. In such cases, we concatenate some partitions into virtual partitions and distribute them to separate remote tasks. As a result, we achieve an optimal number of remote tasks equal to the CPU count. However, there are situations where this method is less effective. For straightforward operations like apply, using this partition splitting strategy can lead to performance issues due to an excessively large number of remote tasks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This approach works well when the number of partitions close to the number of CPUs.
However, there are the cases when this method is not that effective. For straightforward operations like `map`
on a DataFrame that has the number of partitions greatly exceeding the number of CPUs,
using this partitioning strategy can lead to performance issues due to an excessively large number of remote tasks.
```

Author: Done

> To address this problem, a new approach called “Dynamic Partitioning” has been implemented in Modin 0.30.0. The main idea behind Dynamic Partitioning is to merge block partitions into virtual partitions, reducing the overall number of remote tasks.

Reviewer 2: I think some context or links to explanations to what  "`block  partitions`" `"virtual partitions"`  `"remote tasks"` etc mean would be helpful for a new reader as these terms might come out of the blue for some.

Author: Unfortunately, I didn’t find suitable information about partitions in the Modin documentation, and I don’t think we need to add this information here. I believe we can update this post if it changes

Reviewer: No need for this kind of low level details.

> To address this problem, a new approach called “Dynamic Partitioning” has been implemented in Modin 0.30.0. The main idea behind Dynamic Partitioning is to merge block partitions into virtual partitions, reducing the overall number of remote tasks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To address this problem, a new approach called `Dynamic Partitioning` has been implemented in Modin 0.30.0.
The main idea behind `Dynamic Partitioning` is to combine some partitions into virtual ones, thereby reducing the overall number of remote tasks.
```

> ## Boosted DataFrame operations

Reviewer: Let's remove this paragraph.

Author: I think I'll agree because the user can find this list of operations in the "Performance results" section

> In Modin 0.30.0, dynamic partitioning is applied to the Map and TreeReduce operators.

Reviewer 2: Could we have links/description on Map and TreeReduce operator too?

Author: Yes, thanks, I added them.

Reviewer: Fine

The Map operator is used for DataFrame operations such as abs, map, isna, notna, replace, and others.
The TreeReduce operator is used for operations like count, sum, prod, any, all, max, min, and mean.

## Using Dynamic Partitioning in Modin

> You don’t need to set any environment variables to activate this approach. Simply update to Modin 0.30.0, and your scripts for wide Dataframes will benefit from improved performance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You don't need to set any configuration variables to enable this approach.
Simply update to Modin 0.30.0 or higher.
```

> ## Perfomance result

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Perfomance results
```

Author: Done

> | operation | modin 0.29.0 | modin 0.30.0 | speed up |
> | --------- | ------------ | ------------ | -------- |     
> | abs       | 5.768716335  | 1.559553780  | 369.90%  |
> | map       | 5.665995907  | 1.663878210  | 340.53%  |
> | isna      | 4.371069111  | 1.041565318  | 419.66%  |
> | notna     | 4.149922594  | 1.276469827  | 325.11%  |
> | round     | 4.789841156  | 1.581816196  | 302.81%  |
> | replace   | 4.871268023  | 1.442099884  | 337.79%  |
> | count     | 5.163318828  | 1.835885521  | 281.24%  |
> | sum       | 5.351826966  | 1.907279816  | 280.60%  |
> | prod      | 5.186810397  | 2.101620920  | 246.80%  |
> | any       | 5.251107819  | 1.860132668  | 282.30%  |
> | all       | 5.724503774  | 1.716603592  | 333.48%  |
> | max       | 5.307218991  | 1.764660481  | 300.75%  |
> | min       | 5.537900437  | 1.803861558  | 307.00%  |
> | mean      | 6.400612667  | 2.005258847  | 319.19%  |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Operation | Modin 0.29.0 | Modin 0.30.0 | Ratio |
| --------- | ------------ | ------------ | -------- |     
| abs       | 5.768716335  | 1.559553780  | 369.90%  |
| map       | 5.665995907  | 1.663878210  | 340.53%  |
| isna      | 4.371069111  | 1.041565318  | 419.66%  |
| notna     | 4.149922594  | 1.276469827  | 325.11%  |
| round     | 4.789841156  | 1.581816196  | 302.81%  |
| replace   | 4.871268023  | 1.442099884  | 337.79%  |
| count     | 5.163318828  | 1.835885521  | 281.24%  |
| sum       | 5.351826966  | 1.907279816  | 280.60%  |
| prod      | 5.186810397  | 2.101620920  | 246.80%  |
| any       | 5.251107819  | 1.860132668  | 282.30%  |
| all       | 5.724503774  | 1.716603592  | 333.48%  |
| max       | 5.307218991  | 1.764660481  | 300.75%  |
| min       | 5.537900437  | 1.803861558  | 307.00%  |
| mean      | 6.400612667  | 2.005258847  | 319.19%  |
```
Let's use ratio = 0.29.0 / 0.30.0 as we discussed.

Author: I tried it, but I think it doesn't look so clear in the table

Reviewer: Percentages are usually used if the speed up is not that significant to emphasize percentage for an improvement. Ratio looks clearer here as we have decent boost.

Author: Ok, I get it

To test the performance boost of Dynamic Partitioning, we generated a wide DataFrame with a shape of (20000, 5000). As you can see, the new Modin version provides significant speed-up for DataFrames with a large number of columns.

> ## Next Steps

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Next Steps
```

When an operation is executed, the required partitions are sent to remote tasks and processed in parallel.
To achieve optimal performance it's essential to fully utilize all available CPUs.
Therefore, Modin splits the DataFrame into partitions along both axes,
sometimes resulting in an `N × N` partition grid (where N represents the number of CPUs).

This approach works well when the number of partitions close to the number of CPUs.
However, there are the cases when this method is not that effective. For straightforward operations like `map`
on a DataFrame that has the number of partitions greatly exceeding the number of CPUs,
using this partitioning strategy can lead to performance issues due to an excessively large number of remote tasks.

To address this problem, a new approach called `Dynamic Partitioning` has been implemented in Modin 0.30.0.
The main idea behind `Dynamic Partitioning` is to combine some partitions into virtual ones, thereby reducing the overall number of remote tasks.

### Using Dynamic Partitioning in Modin

You don't need to set any configuration variables to enable this approach.
Simply update to Modin 0.30.0 or higher.

### Performance result

> | Operation | Modin 0.29.0 | Modin 0.30.0 | Ratio |
> | --------- | ------------ | ------------ | ----- |     
> | abs       | 5.768716335  | 1.559553780  | 3.70  |
> | map       | 5.665995907  | 1.663878210  | 3.41  |
> | isna      | 4.371069111  | 1.041565318  | 4.20  |
> | notna     | 4.149922594  | 1.276469827  | 3.25  |
> | round     | 4.789841156  | 1.581816196  | 3.03  |
> | replace   | 4.871268023  | 1.442099884  | 3.38  |
> | count     | 5.163318828  | 1.835885521  | 2.81  |
> | sum       | 5.351826966  | 1.907279816  | 2.81  |
> | prod      | 5.186810397  | 2.101620920  | 2.47  |
> | any       | 5.251107819  | 1.860132668  | 2.82  |
> | all       | 5.724503774  | 1.716603592  | 3.33  |
> | max       | 5.307218991  | 1.764660481  | 3.01  |
> | min       | 5.537900437  | 1.803861558  | 3.07  |
> | mean      | 6.400612667  | 2.005258847  | 3.19  |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Operation | Modin 0.29.0(s) | Modin 0.30.0(s) | Speedup |
| --------- | ------------ | ------------ | ----- |     
| abs       | 5.768716335  | 1.559553780  | 3.70x  |
| map       | 5.665995907  | 1.663878210  | 3.41x  |
| isna      | 4.371069111  | 1.041565318  | 4.20x  |
| notna     | 4.149922594  | 1.276469827  | 3.25x  |
| round     | 4.789841156  | 1.581816196  | 3.03x  |
| replace   | 4.871268023  | 1.442099884  | 3.38x  |
| count     | 5.163318828  | 1.835885521  | 2.81x  |
| sum       | 5.351826966  | 1.907279816  | 2.81x  |
| prod      | 5.186810397  | 2.101620920  | 2.47x  |
| any       | 5.251107819  | 1.860132668  | 2.82x  |
| all       | 5.724503774  | 1.716603592  | 3.33x  |
| max       | 5.307218991  | 1.764660481  | 3.01x  |
| min       | 5.537900437  | 1.803861558  | 3.07x  |
| mean      | 6.400612667  | 2.005258847  | 3.19x  |
```

Reviewer: Not sure about x but I am okay if you think it is clearer.

Reviewer 2: Ratio seemed a little confusing to me just added x as it felt intuitive

Author: I agree with you, thanks for your suggestions!

> To test the performance boost of Dynamic Partitioning, we generated a wide DataFrame with a shape of (20000, 5000).
> As you can see, the new Modin version provides significant speed-up for DataFrames with a large number of columns.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To test the performance boost of Dynamic Partitioning we generated a wide DataFrame with a shape of (20000, 5000), which result in a large amount of partitions.
As you can see, Modin 0.30.0 provides decent speed-up by benefiting from `Dynamic Partitioning`.
```

Author: >To test the performance boost of Dynamic Partitioning we generated a wide DataFrame with a shape of (20000, 5000), which result in a large amount of partitions.

I am not entirely sure if this is absolutely correct, as the number of partitions depends not only on the size of the data. Additionally, I would like to retain the mention of a ‘large number of columns,’ as it provides an easier way to understand the scenarios where this approach works.

Reviewer: Even when the number of columns is large, the user may set `MinColumnPartitionsSize` config to a respective value so the number of partitions can get low along the columns. I think we should explicitly mention "large amount of partitions" as I put in the suggestion.

Author: Yes, it is possible but I am not sure that `MinColumnPartitionsSize` is a common parameter. 
As you said before, we don't need to add low level details here, but how can user work with the wide Dataframe? In my opinion, using DataFrame with large count of columns is the main way. I think we can add information, that  `MinColumnPartitionsSize` can impact on performance and add link to it in Modin docs.

Reviewer: The main point here is "large number of partitions" but not "large number of columns" because even if we have a low number of columns, we can still have a large number of partitions along rows.

Author: If a DataFrame has a low number of columns, it usually give not so many partitions, because by the default it no more than CPU count row partitions. (Nx1, or Nx2). The main idea of the resolved issue is working with a large count of columns(NxN).  Of course, it depends on `MinColumnPartitionsSize` value, but it is not most important thing.

I understand, that count of partitions is very important, so it thoroughly explained in the previous paragraphs. But I want keep here a easy way for beginner user to understand which Dataframe is wide.

Reviewer: Even if a Dataframe has a low number of columns, there are certain operations in Modin that can lead to an excessive amount of partitions both along rows and columns. In the suggestion above we are mentioning both "wide dataframe" and "large amount of partitions" so I think we give users the understanding what dataframe is wide (providing the shape) and what dataframe can have excessive partitions.

Author: Ok, you persuaded me. Thanks for your explanation

### Next Steps

> Dynamic Partitioning will be implemented for other DataFrame operations as well. Stay tuned for further updates in 
> our GitHub page and follow our posts to stay informed about Modin news.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are plans to introduce `Dynamic Partitioning` into some more operators in Modin.
Stay tuned for further updates on  Modin GitHub page and follow our posts to stay informed about Modin news.
```

> Stay tuned for further updates on  Modin GitHub page and follow our posts to stay informed about Modin news.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Stay tuned for further updates on Modin GitHub page and follow our posts to stay informed about Modin news.
```
